[moc:: [[MOC SPArtifact]]]

# Todo
- [ ] introduce dose perturbation language for SPArc/proton
- [ ] incorporate relevant ideas from [[Zheng Implant 2022]]
- [ ] incorporate relevant ideas from [[MOC SPArtifact#Notes from Zheng Lit Review]]

# Introduction
## Implants
Implantable hardware plays an important role in the management of several orthopedic disease processes, both benign, as with hip replacements, and malignant, as with pathologic fractures. With an aging population, we would expect both benign and malignant indications for implantation to increase. Hip replacements are becoming increasingly more common with 81,800 being performed annually ([[@NationalJointRegistry2019]]). Pathologic fractures are a frequent and dreaded complication of osseous metastatic disease with a prevalence of 28% ([[@saadPathologicFracturesCorrelate2007]]) and an annual incidence of 5% per year ([[@hernandezIncidenceBoneMetastases2018]]). Of these, 56% undergo implant based fixation, either prophylactically or therapeutically ([[@perezManagementPathologicFractures1972]]). 87% of those patients undergo post-stabilization radiation therapy to enhance local control ([[@wolanczykRadiotherapyBisphosphonatesSurgical2016]]). With 1,950,000 new cancer diagnoses per year, this would suggest that nearly 50,000 patients per year require post-stabilization radiation therapy. As the rate of cancer diagnoses continues to rise, so too would we expect the need for post-operative radiation therapy.

Historically, metal-based implants have been used, owing to their excellent rigidity and strength as well as low reactivity. Unfortunately, this also necessarily creates significant imaging artifacts due to the high Z of these materials.

{_consider dropping below/integrating briefly above_}
Recently, carbon fiber spinal fixation hardware—with dramatically lower Z, approximating that of the surrounding tissue—has been developed in an attempt to address this issue; however, uptake has been slow.  [[@zavrasAttitudesTrendsUse2022]] surveyed surgeons of the North American Spine Society and determined that these newer carbon fiber implants have a relatively low utilization with use in only 27% of anterior approaches and 15% of posterior approaches. [[@khanCarbonFiberreinforcedPEEK2023]] suggests that 72.5% of these cases go on to receive postoperative radiotherapy and so radiation treatment planning is often complicated by the presence of significant artifact.

## Implications for Radiotherapy
The presence of large metal implants affects radiotherapy in two ways: 1) inducing artifacts in the planning CT imaging which affects _in silico_ radiation modeling, and 2) attenuating the beam directly _in vivo_. Thus, any attempt to improve radiation dose delivery in proximity to metal implants must address one or both of these processes.

Furthermore, these 2 processes have different implications and importance when considering proton therapy. In photon therapy, changes in material (and thus electron density) lead to increased attenuation and backscatter. In contrast, for proton therapy, changes in material (and thus relative stopping power) instead affect proton range. The resulting dose distributions for protons are typically much more sensitive to changes in material: modelling would suggest 5-10 times more sensitive.  [[@mullerDosimetricImpactStabilizing2020]] calculated a 10-20% increase in dose heterogeneity with a 6% change in stopping power of protons while the same change in electron density caused less than 2% of increase with photons. These errors, when propagated through the treatment planning system can cause severe under or overdosing in the patient.

### Photon Therapy
As photon radiation tends to interact in a more predictable manner with the implants, the imaging artifacts tend to drive the dose-distribution abnormalities. Much of the effort to address this, then, focuses on the optimal artifact reduction algorithms—which typically perform quite well. For example, [[@akdenizEffectsMetalImplants2019]] shows out-of-plane dose alterations up to 6% and in-plane alterations up to 22%. These were both reduced to 1% when planned with use of the O-MAR algorithm. These effects tend to be significantly worse with stainless steel compared to titanium ([[@akdenizEffectsMetalImplants2019]], [[@liDosimetricImpactCT2023]]).

Regardless of the implant material, with proper artifact reduction algorithms and an experienced team, high-quality VMAT plans are possible even in very challenging settings. Consider prostate treatment with bilateral hip prostheses: [[@cousinsProstateRadiotherapySetting2021]] showed the presence of these implants resulted in only a minimal, 2.5% volume increase at high-dose levels (V80-95%) and a modest, 9% volume increase at intermediate-dose levels (V50%).

### Proton Therapy
This is more challenging in the setting of proton therapy, given their exquisite sensitivity, and so it is even more important to account for imaging artifacts during treatment planning. [[@newhauserCanMegavoltageComputed2008]] estimated that metal implants caused a 5-12 mm range error with uncorrected CT imaging. One technique is to use MVCT which would nearly eliminate streak artifacts. In the prior investigation, this improved range errors to < 3 mm and in [[@zhaoDosePerturbationCaused2020]], dose perturbation caused by metallic ports improved from ±100% with kVCT to only ±10% with MVCT. As the treatment planning system depends upon proper mapping of Hounsfield Unit to Relative Stopping Power, artifact reduction algorithms, while greatly reducing artifacts over the image as a whole, can actually _cause_ an artifact at the surface of the implant which can influence the resultant dose distribution. [[@jiaDosePerturbationEffect2015]] showed an _in vitro_ 10% dose enhancement at the distal edge of a metal implant but the treatment planning system using OMAR imaging predicted a 10-17% relative dose _reduction_.

{_important_}
As photons typically are delivered via arc techniques, the exact orientation of the artifact and the relative position of the implant itself are less critical than in proton therapy where treatment is limited to only a few beam angles. [[@verburgDosimetricAccuracyProton2013]] demonstrated that artifact orientation dramatically affects the calculated dose distribution: perpendicularly-oriented artifacts produced a negligible impact while artifacts traveling perpendicularly within the beam produced range shifts of up to 10 mm. 

Beyond artifact effects, the metal implants themselves result in significant dose perturbation. [[@limMicroscopicGoldParticleBased2009]] reported 5-9% dose reduction distal to gold fiducial markers. [[@newhauserMonteCarloSimulations2007]] showed maximal dose reductions of 85% for gold, 35% for stainless steel, and 15% for titanium markers when oriented in parallel to the beam at the beam edge. [[@giebelerDosePerturbationsImplanted2009]] demonstrated distal dose reductions of 9-85% dependent upon helical gold marker size and orientation. 

## Clinical Implications
More than simply an academic or dosimetric concern, this range and dose uncertainty translates directly into clinical outcomes. For patients with extracranial chordomas and sarcomas, multiple series have demonstrated significant absolute reductions in local control from 31%–70% when in close proximity to large metallic implants ([[@rutzExtracranialChordomaOutcome2007]], [[@staabSpotScanningBasedProtonTherapy2011]], [[@delaneyPHASEIISTUDY2009]], [[@murrayPrognosticFactorsSpinal2020]], [[@sniderLongTermOutcomesPrognostic2018]]]])
These local failures were found to translate to significant absolute reductions in overall survival of 14% in [[@sniderLongTermOutcomesPrognostic2018]] and 18% in [[@murrayPrognosticFactorsSpinal2020]].

## Opportunity for SPArc
Spot-scanned Proton Arc therapy (SPArc) is a new implementation of proton therapy where pencil-beam scanning protons are delivered continuously as the gantry moves through an arc, rather than stopping at pre-specified locations as in Intensity Modulated Proton Therapy (IMPT). This is analogous to the difference between Volumetric Modulated Arc Therapy (VMAT) and step-and-shoot Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT). This technique results in a dramatic increase in high-dose conformality and decreased treatment times at the expense of increased volumes of low-dose irradiation of non-target tissue.

With IMPT's exquisite sensitivity to material-type and highly-directional response to imaging artifacts, metal-implants have proven challenging thus far to treat with protons. This often necessitates treatment with VMAT which—while generating more predictable dose-distributions in close proximity to metal implants—sacrifices many of the low-dose advantages of IMPT. By spreading out the beam entry and increasing the degrees of freedom, SPArc has the potential to mitigate many of these issues with IMPT and improve dose-distributions in the presence of large metal implants while maintaining many of the low-dose advantages over VMAT. To our knowledge, this represents the first analysis of rotational protons in the setting of metal implants.