## Background and Aims
Spot-scanning Proton Arc Therapy (SPArc) is a new delivery technique which promises faster treatment times over existing step-and-shoot Intensity Modulated Proton Therapy techniques. There has been an increase in demand for proton therapy resulting in many new centers being built and the retrofitting of additional treatment vaults in existing centers. To explore the added value of additional vaults in light of the increased throughput offered by SPArc, we constructed a model.

## Methods
A model was developed incorporating SPArc and IMPT machine delays obtained from de Jong et al. (PMID: 36373893), patient couch setup  and egress time  (13.3 min.), irradiation time (IMPT: 2.4 min./field, SPArc: 4 min./arc), and beamline switching time (30 sec.), To more accurately model real world use-cases, an anesthesia delay (20 min.) was incorporated. The model's patient throughput and duty-cycle predictions were validated with two institutions' clinical logfiles. The model was then used to quantify the effects of vault number and cohort anesthesia requirements on patient throughput and per-patient on-couch waiting time, assuming a 15-hour clinical operation day.

## Results
Validation was successful. With a single vault for 11 hours, the model predicted 22.9 treatments compared to 21 reflected in the clinical logfiles (20% anesthesia). With a 2-vault setup for 8.3 hours, the model predicted 33.4 treatments compared to 35 logged treatments (5% anesthesia). In the latter scenario, duty cycle logs were available: the model prediction (23%) and logfiles (26%) agreed closely.

In simulation with 20% anesthesia cohort, median maximum daily patient throughput increased logarithmically with increasing vault number (x) for both SPArc (throughput = 33 + 96log(x): r^2=0.96) and IMPT (throughput = 32 + 63log(x): r^2=0.99). SPArc was able to treat 24%, 25%, 29%, 37%, and 49% more patients than IMPT in 1–5 vaults, respectively. By analyzing the effects of removing anesthesia patients from each cohort, we find that SPArc incurred a relatively constant 18±1% loss in productivity irrespective of vault number while IMPT's loss improved linearly from 17%–6% from 1-5 vaults.

Median on-couch waiting times (minutes) increased quadratically with increasing vault number (x) for both SPArc (wait = -0.54x + 0.29x^2 + 0.86: r^2=0.99) and IMPT (wait = 1.25x + 0.63x^2 + 0.01: r^2=1.0). Compared to IMPT, SPArc reduced on-couch wait times by 77±4%, consistent across vault counts. Anesthesia incurred increases in on-couch time which worsened linearly with increasing vault count for both SPArc (0%–30%) and IMPT (1%-15%).

## Conclusion
This model suggests that the reductions in SPArc treatment time can improve the treatment workflow efficiency across all proton center configurations as measured by improved patient throughput and reduced on-couch waiting time relative to IMPT. The optimal number of vaults appears to be limited by anesthesia requirements and on-couch waiting time, but this warrants further analysis.